

# Asking permission: OSS and Design Contribution

It occurs to me that there is something potential unique in the relationship that designers have towards contribution to OSS (where the contribution is highly likely to not be code related PR’s). There is a process of ‘asking for permission’ in OSS when you want to do design contributions. This isn’t always the case as there are papers that detail when designers have ‘gifted’ design over to an OSS project without prior notification, discussion or agreement and these have often been met with confusion, curiosity and in the most unfortunate circumstances - aggression and dismissiveness. Successful design contribution to OSS has usually always been when the designers have developed a relationship with the OSS but is success really the focus here?

When posed with the challenge of organising a workshop for designers to contribute to OSS I was stumped by this conundrum, how to construct the engagement prior to the contribution? 

Do I experiment with no contact prior to the workshop contribution? and how might that feel for the designers involved in the process of workshop to contribution if that doesn’t ‘fit’ within the observed and agreed ways that OSS prefers to receive contribution.

The larger question is why is this the case in OSS? why is there an established culture of ‘read the f*cking manual’ before contributing which extends to the kinds of questions that designers ask ‘Who should this be design for and why?’ ‘What is important to those users and why?’ ‘How is this tool used and what environmental and social factors impact its use?’ are all question that are ‘not easy to contribute’ and to the ears of developers maintaining ‘the code’ of OSS are questions answered by ‘reading the f*cking manual’.

When we enter to to the world of Humanitarian/HR’s OSS though the context of how the tool is used becomes critical to the Hum + HR’s cases. In that the context helps the impact to be measured against other external criteria that the Hum + HR’s organisations are to be ‘measured’ against and therefore design practices offer more to a Hum + HR’s context. It is possible to not build a sense of context and trust and ‘gift’ a HOSS project with design. I expect it would be gate-keeped in a different way to FLOSS projects generally and met with curiosity and relative panic as opposed to being ignored or resisted in papers that have explored the relationship between usability/design contributions and FLOSS. This may come down to many HOSS projects being maintained by a different kind of developer/maintainer alongside statistically more non-developer background maintainers. 

In my experiences in non-profit, humanitarian and human rights OSS projects the developers that maintain those tools often have a background and a context more closely aligned to the humanitarian and human rights space, either through previous experience (paid or unpaid) or a live experience context that allows them to balance the needs of humanitarian/human rights with the needs of FLOSS. Not that these are truly in opposition to each other, more like distant cousins that speak rarely but still have a basis in the same world. In this way, the designer that brings in a human (user) perspective to the HOSS, regardless of whether it was solicited or a ‘warmed-up’ relationship, the HOSS is more likely to pay attention to this contribution as it offers insight into the core context, helping humans with critical needs.

Perhaps then there are gradients of positioning within HOSS? So HOSS that is more closely aligned with FLOSS in it’s structures, attitudes and people, HOSS that is more closely aligned with humanitarian/human rights in it’s structures, attitudes and people and then the HOSS projects that have an equal or near equal balance of both?