# Reflections on 'doing' Participatory Design and Participatory Action research in HOSS tech orgs

The reflections on open source software around participatory design and participatory action, action research and i'm going to specifically speak about one project when open source software project, I was hired on as a staff member, so these reflections are within the sphere of a paid role which I do believe becomes important when we talk about the nature of open source software and participatory design generally and how this manifests when we talk about a specific aspect of open source software in the form of contributions, which are often voluntary, so this is a contentious point already in the reflections on open source software as a designer doing participatory design work and the valuing of that work paid and unpaid contributions and the kind of unclear sense of what those two things mean in the terms of value.

To reference a single project within this open source software organization I'm just going to call it 'Org A' so that I don't name the organization specifically. This project was the biggest and most prominent example of active participatory design efforts that I could recall and can observe retrospectively.
I participated in the project as a practicing designer within that organization and while I do think it's important and useful to reflect on other projects and other ways that participatory design appeared in this open source software 'Org A', but I want to focus in on this one project first and add my reflections there before I go broader, although it will actually be relatively hard to not go broader.

Participatory design is the human-centered approach to a co-design engagement with users and stakeholders and it doesn't necessarily have a set end date, as it were, so participatory design in and of itself can be a engagement of some description with users/participants for however long that is. PD doesn't necessarily say that you have to 'do PD' throughout the whole project, it could be parts of the project as long as I think specific methods and activities and engagements are used, it can then be participatory design and I do think that.

For this reflection it's important to try and clarify that quite early on, given the nature of this specific project that I worked on within 'Org A'. This open source software already existed, and it existed for more than 10 years it's been used in various different ways for more than 10 years and it's as a community empowerment OSS tool around many different kinds of humanitarian and humans rights purposes/cases. This reflection is on a specific project that was a consortium funded from the EU across three years to look at how technology (generally) can be used during peace education and peace building efforts in East Africa, specifically in Rwanda and Kenya.

I (the PD designer) worked with a number of other consortium organizations, including three universities and other commercial technology companys/NGO's and 'Org A' ourselves was as a technology partner with NGO status with existing open source software.

Reflections on the intricacies of the consortium and how it was funded is interestinga nd does impact the PD and OSS but isn't the sole focus of this reflection because that isn't necessarily what the focus of participatory design and open source was. The focus was with the peace building and education 'end users' (CSO's and public etc.) and the intersections between these 'end users'.
It's worth stating in a reflective way that many of the partners in the consortium had a very unclear idea of what they were responsible for doing either individually on the consortium project deliverables and most importantly, collectively as consortium partners. There were a number of different people/organisations within this consortium that were really quite confused as to what their part to play on in this was and on relfection the participatory design element of the project was hard to grasp by most of the consortium. It was most readily engaged with by consortium partners that were reliant on the PD aspects of the project in order to meet their own deliverables.

On reflection to unpack that more in terms of open source and participatory design it meant that it was very difficult to, as the designer delivering on the PD engagements, to know, plan for and understand at what points different consortium partners wanted and in what kind of responsibiliy capacity for their own deliverables of the funded work.

This impacted how we did the participatory design elements of the technology project workshops and engagements and meant that we didn't always know what stakeholders we were including or working with or what their needs or goals were. This manifested in terms of informing the participatory design elements and also their level of engagement and an understanding of the participatory design elements in terms and the lens of what the technology output could be, as well as their own output. 

The other organizations within the consortium had outputs that were not necessarily focused on building, co-creating and designng technology but we're educational programs around how technology can be used in peace building work. Another university was focused on analyzing a particular methodology (living labs) that we're using as a framework fro the participatory design elements of engagements around technology for peace building.

Living labs, sits closely with open source in a co-design and co-creation aspect and supposed to be a user led way of creation and maintainence.

The next reflection is centred around the participatory design engagements with with users/participants.

Org A was the organization that was responsible for doing the participatory design engagements with users and stakeholders, I was the lead designer on this part of the project as 'org A' (the technology partner). It was very difficult to understand why, how and what parts of the methodology from the University partners needed to be included, and with what level of rigor and inflexibility. It was also a challenge to understand the overarching goals of the university partner in terms of what they wanted to 'know' about the methodology.

This made it difficult to really focus solely on the outcomes of the participatory nature of the co-design for peace-building technology when I was unsure of what other factors needed to be considered for the University partner.

One of the things that I want to express as a reflection of participatory design within this open source consortium project space was that there was already an idea of what we wanted the software and the outcomes to look like before we even began to do the engagements and one of the toughest things was making sure that we could have that exploratory element of participatory design and that we left room to be surprised and to learn things, to adapt, given the input from from real users. It's often the case in many software projects, open source or not, that a desired outcome has alreayd been 'set' or 'expected'. Especially when the funding for the consortium is 'defined' by 'delivering' certain things e.g. software, artifacts from workshops etc. when perhaps a participatory design approach to co-design with users is that the outcomes can be drastically shifted from the expectation, for example if we discovered that technology was not at all a priority for peace building and built some thing else, despite the 'how does tecnology support peace building efforts' framing of the consortium funding.

Another reflection, to move on to the users and what came of the engagemts. We did not effectively communicate the nature and processes of open source software in terms of future co-creation and contribution particularly well. I notice on relfection that this definitely wasn't a focus of the participatory design element of the work that we did with users to the projects potential detriment.

We explained what the OSS tools were that we were using a working knowledge of when we did co-design participatory work with users/ This was more along the lines of knowing/understanding certain tools capabilities that could be used in peace building a peace education within the paritcipants contexts, but we didn't actively work on modifiying or working with these tools in a non-prototype way. We only ever 'looked at' the OSS and the theoretical uses of and some demonstrations of the kind of purposes and content.

We never established whether open source software was something that all or any of our users, engage with or had a good understanding/informed understanding of.

One of the interesting reflections within participatory design from this OSS project is the meaning of the artifacts from co-design or outputs from the users during participatory engagements. These often inform the tool/future outputs for the users/community and then often the engagement proecess informs the ongoing relationship and interaction 'processes' around that same tool/outcome in a (often hopefully) cyclical. Within OSS spaces these would be considered 'contributions to the open source' if they were made opena nd available on the 'platform' that the OSS tool primarily uses. 

The reflection here being how similar, yet complementary these practices can be within a participatory design in OSS spaces way. Here the potential for PD to understand OSS contribution practices and for OSS to understand PD co-design processes could mean that if well integrated there could be open ways of practicing PD codesign within OSS contribution frameworks that could help solve for cases where the facilitation of co-design fades away after designers have ended a funded (or unfuded but unsustainable engagement process) coud be supported by an OSS contribution framework, especially if the OSS's contribution framework is inclusive of design and user-led design and well sustained.

With this project we had an understanding of what we wanted to learn, and agreement with stakeholders on what we invited pariticpants to do, but the direct 'outcome' wasn't necessarily to contribute or 'tangibly' improve our open source software, that an opportunity was missed by not understanding how, as a consortium project, we wanted participants to engage with the open source software from a contributions and design perspective. Likely due to how the consortium and myself were not deeply proficient in how to involve those OSS contribution pathways within the wider project.

So I didn't follow an OSS contribution process that I likely would now that I have more proficiency with open source software. And what it means to play the 'custodian role' with OSS design, were the participatory design work is 'held' by someone who knows how to feed those contributions through the 'pipeline' of the Open Source Software. I did record all of the data and artifacts from the participatory co-design workshop engagements but did not do a good job of helping that knowledge become part of the Open Source 'intelligence' or 'user insight' for either our own OSS organization as or for other organizations doing peace building and peace education work.


Another reflection is that it is very difficult to try to bring any design contribution into the actual OSS tool. There is a lack of processes for design to take a custodian role in sheparding design contributions into OSS as well as any designerswilling to lay that eveolving role as it's very likely a long and convoluted communication process with the OSS mainatiners and requires as much 'design education' as it does design proficiency. For me this connect with the difficulty in embedding a persisting co-design process within participant communities without a design custodian. Here are where there are similar struggles in PD as Design in OSS where the ethos for design in OSS is at least to make the process of contributing design to the OSS as asynchronous, remote and non-time sensitive as possible. 


A further reflection on how to blend a PD and Design in OSS practice is a challenge in actually expressing what participatory design insights and co-design actually look like within the OSS expressed clearly for whatever the implementation aspects of the project are. This often requires designer in the OSS being able to do more prototyping or designing in order to help the PD co-design insights be expressed within the OSS and potentially more co-design throughout whatever 'development pipeline' the OSS improvement process has.
A connection between PD and Design in OSS here being that participatory design and co-design is often intended to be continuous and owned by the users and that OSS often intends to be 'deployable' and usable by anyone who intends to use and/or improve that OSS tool. Here a more distributed or 'owned' way of continuous co-design could be faicilitated by an OSS tool ecosystem if the adoption and onboarding of OSS processes and practices was well understood and facilitated within the PD and co-design enagagements.


This reflection on how participatory design and open source processes could see the users, that are part of the participatory design processes, become open source contributors and how that could become a natural progression of participatory design within an open source environment is exciting. However, there is some dedication needed to seeing design contribution through to the OSS and that those processes can often wear contributors and end-users down in terms of time and effort. One of the biggest difficulties is trying to not just 'do participatory design' in an open source software, but to bring in elements of the participatory processes into an open source software process  would be a longer relationship about 'change management' in OSS as not many OSS tools are practiing this currently. Being a 'pioneer' of newer processes is risky in OSS and only undertaken by the most 'well supported of OSS'.


Relfecting on the specific nature of the kinds of participants within a human rights and humanitarian OSS context is firstly that the technology is often a vehicle for participants expression of justice, and freedom to speak on their human rights needs. The OSS is not necessarily the part of their experience that they live, eat, breathe sleep as much as the advocacy work. More often than not the OSS is in a very strict sense a 'tool' to do their human rights and humanitarian advocacy work. This often alienates the users from an effective co-design process within the OSS.


OSS often by it's nature, stipulates that you are deeply interested in the technological implementation as well as using the OSS as a 'means to an end', which I observed was more of the case with those working in peace education and peace building. This reflection on the nature of the participants was a interesting and speaks to how PD works with participants to engage with tools and in comparison how open source software expects contributors to enagage with tools.

On reflection I also expect that these peace building and peace education participants are more used to a participatory design environment and engagement. I think this is something that they feel more proficient in engaging with. This make speak moreso to participatory designs focus of 'going where the suers are' and meeting participants at their engagement level in order to provoke and co-design process. Those methods are more successful more accessible than open source software's.

I am however, relfecting on a 'barrier' within participatory design and how the design gets expressed from the co-design process into 'action' and how in some PD spaces this meets the participates at however they can 'action' their needs but within OSS this would press against the barrier of how to move into the 'pipeline' of improvements previously reflected on above.


On reflection regarding the humanitarian/human rights in the Global South context, I think that there is an expectation of being engaged with around these kinds of topics. The people that we worked with have familiarity with participatory engagement and I think the from my experience working in communities outside of Africa there then tends to be a familiarity around 'reciveing aid' and to participate in these kinds of engagements from institutions and NGO's regularly and there is a sense that the participants expect there to not be any follow up co-design or actionable engagement processes due the to the exploitative nature of funded humanitarian/human rights work and 'outputs' rarely have a longevity to them or conversations about longevity. Especially when the engagement consortium are from countries that colonised the countries that these engagements are now being practiced in. This is where mistrust and political complexities around aid work come into play. I expect this would be different if the participatory design, co-design and OSS was better 'owned' by the countries that use them.

There is a somewhat inherent colonial aspect to participatory design and OSS in this context as many of the participants were expected to give up your participatory insight the moment that you write it down in these co-design spaces. I expect that a lot of those participants enter into that space with the expectation that what they produce will be taken from them by these Western European technologists/designers.

Here we begin to explore a connected topic about how does open source have longevity or more commonly 'sustainability' and what does support look like in OSS.


Is participatory design supposed to empower and to give the users and participants of voice and and helping them understand what their part is to play? This is similar to open source software contributions and processes in that OSS intends to be 'accessible and remixable' to all that can and are able to deploy it successfully.


It is worth noting that I cannot reflect on open source that does not have a humanitarian/human rights purpose within this projects context.


I relfected on the different stakeholders in participatory design, but I didn't reflect on the people working on the open source and I think that this is a complicated reflection because in OSS we have poorly-defined roles for example, I am a paid designer on this open source software project for 'Organization A' and there are several other staff members that are paid to work on projects for 'Organization A' on the open source software it's not always very clear what amount of time they will spend on what part of that open source software because it's often that the open source software tool and ecosystem is large. In that reflection this means that the other non-designer staff on OSS projects may not be able to or interested in the design contributions from participants.

However, I also want to reflect on the participatory design that you do with staff, maintainers, developers across the 'paid' and 'unpaid' spectrum as they are all often 'developing that tool' so there's a lot of documentation about 'who are' the multiple different people that participate in open source software.

You could argue that the because they work on the OSS and develop the OSS that the developers, designers or whoever works on the tool and contributes to it are also stakeholders of the participatory design process but from an informed and involved perspective which can then become compicated to unpick from their biases about the OSS and what their role is within open source software become really difficult to draw lines between. 

So who do we do participatory design with and define as the participants and the users of that OSS? The end users? the developers/contributors? how far and broad does this become and when do end-users cross over into contributors and how does that impact, inform or change any of the PD co-design process?

In some cases that could be the original creator of the OSS and what does that mean in PD/co-design terms?


