# Thoughts on mentorship in open source design and the complexities of culture between design and oss

What I’m really trying to parse out in my PhD research is what purpose does design and by association, designers play in the creation, build and sustainability of Humanitarian focussed OSS. 
There are many connected questions and ideas, things around whether there are things that work with designers + OSS that also work in designers + HOSS with a bias hypothesis that designers + HOSS processes may be the way to have OSS (generally) become a more visible (potential) part of designers’s careers and life. 

I think HOSS is generally more ‘palatable’ to designers in terms of being understood as a purpose and I think there’s, for lack of a better term a ‘hook’ for designers to connect with. 

My connected hypothesis for developers in OSS generally is that the hooks for participation are around practicing tech stacks and languages and becoming proficient in them as well as believing in a certain OSS purpose e.g. ‘I believe strongly in contributing to the betterment and stabilisation of Ruby on Rails language as I use the language in my professional and/or personal life and want it to remain stable’. 

I think this could possibly be true for some designers too but given that the tools that are the primary part of our practice or either non-code (pen paper materials and processes) or proprietary tools used in order to execute a design method/process well the tools in which we use are less of the integral basis of our participation and growth/stabilisation of our ‘tools’ does not have an ‘open shared’ process or culture encompassing it (yet). 
There is a reasonable assumption that can be made where there will be some designers looking to ‘improve a skill or method’ through OSS design contributions. Anecdotally, I’ve had many designers new to OSS ask me about subjects like: Whats the best way to do agile for designers in OSS? What ways are persona documents built in OSS organisations and communities and what processes are the ones that are ‘best’? And How do I best work with a team of developers in OSS and what can be learned through that process that early career designers can take into a professional position? 

The tricky part here is how unique each OSS project is in terms of how they understand design and how they do their processes, many will be similar or recognisable but many more will feel ‘not quite right’ to designers who have learned a certain process from ‘established and well regarding programs of education or advice’

I think this disparity, this disconnect can be especially hard and then often frustrating for designers that perhaps assumed they would gain ‘industry experience’ by contributing design to OSS projects only to find that the experience is relational and relevant but not in very similar ways to commercial companies. 
Most of the above has focussed on early career designers coming into OSS or designers contributing to their first OSS project but there is a rather unstudied, poorly captured experience of designers that have been within the OSS world for many years - What kind of mentorship do ‘established’ designers need? Does this differ if they are established within OSS or established outside OSS?

I can draw on one example of an established design professional outside of the wider OSS world first coming into it - I had many conversations about how this accomplished and well-established designer was looking around at OSS projects and deciding which to contribute to and why and then, when trying to contribute, finding: 
1. A lack of enthusiasm and uptake of their advice and design strategy. 
2. 2. An actively flippant or hostile environment. 

I think here is where we enter a cultural aspect of OSS that is known but could be better mentored within design spaces and that is the cultural phenomenon of ‘How well you know the OSS, How well you know OSS in general and How you integrate into the community’ if we take an example of a very proficient coder perspective into a OSS project where they are contributing for the first time, there is a cultural norm or expectation that even if you are an expert in the programming language of that OSS project that you will still start at the beginning in terms of community ‘credibility’ and be expected to defer to well established members the community for PR review. 

Putting aside the fact that even if you are an 'expert' in a particular coding language there is still a period of time that is needed to be served in order to full understand the intracacies of the tech build for any project, no OSS that is coded in teh same language are identical. 

So there's an established and well know process here, you learn, you contribute, you are reviewed, you build trust and then you may eventually become a maintainer yourself (if you want to be). This is the process of OSS community trust.
If any developer comes into an OSS project expecting to have a dominant say in their first interactions they're likely to not have a great experience or stay long in that community.

So, when designers of a certain profiecieny level come in and give strategical advice for UX, UI, product or any kind of design really they could be missing that period of trust building and if that is not established in some way the designer will likely be 'gatekeeped' out of the project or be frustrated they aren't being listened to and leave. 

I think this is the gap in mentorship that designers (or anyone in OSS really) knowledgeable about OSS can offer these 'established' design professionals, mentoring around how to approach an OSS project with trust building and understanding at the core of the relationship.

For established design in OSS and knowledgeable about OSS I think there's perhaps two paths. One I can speak from personal experience on. I consider myself reasonably knowledgeable about designing in and for OSS however, there is a lot of mentorship and growth that I ask for from peers around better understanding aspects of OSS I am less knowledgeable about such as governance, licensing, legal details, community building and developer relations and of course, technology and programmin related topics. These are all ways that other people within OSS can mentor reasonably competent designers in OSS. There's also learning from peers in other OSS projects where they might have tried something out and there is more of a peer to peer learning experience.

The intial aspect of this peice of writing was centred around HOSS and that got away from my a little towards the end there...I do still have a strong feeling that HOSS is the best 'entry' OSS for designers (who don't alreayd have a project in mind to contribute to) to get started with and I also think that established designers can find new challenges with HOSS that are unique to that kind of OSS. I just want to briefly touch on those differences and how again a unique aspct factors in here in the mentorship and engagement of designers in HOSS and OSS.

So HOSS will have a clear humanitarian or social good purpose. I think of projects like Ushahidi, Chayn, KoBo toolbox, HURIDOCS:UWAZI, Tella, HOTOSM and so many more when I think of HOSS but there are at least two unique challenges when it comes to working on design for HOSS:
1. There is typically a grant funding structure to the technology and therefore design must be an explicit part of that early funding process or it is typically not included and if included in the early funding, any new design discoveries are hard to 'work in'. e.g. the grant funding says you can do some usertesting for a feature build for the tool and you discover through testing a connected aspect of the tool makes it hard to use the feature that is being funded to be built. Technically you cannot work on this connected issue unless there is enough unrestrcited funding to support it so at best you can document the need well, apply for more funding to address that and then move on with the funded activity.
2. Designers that have not designed within a humanitarian context before need a different kind of training and onbaording than non-humanitarian OSS. This could be on subject like, the humanitarian priciples, working with traumtised users, working with distressing and difficult subject matter and sensitivity traininga round humanitarian development work. This is often something that is hard to mentor and train folks in in short time periods and is very risky to both the designers, the humanitarian OSS and the humans that use the HOSS.

Before I close out I want to pull attention back to point 1 about HOSS and funding - if design contributors are working on a volunteer basis, then shouldn't this not be a problem? if new needs are discovered and documented then the design contributors could work on them right? In theory this is right but the overheads of community engagement and QA on the tech is still and organisational funded overhead. Unless the HOSS tool already has a volunteer contributor/s that are deeply trusted and knowledgeable about the HOSS tool then this would still be done at a cost to the organisation which leads onto another connected issue which is true in humanitarian/NGO/Charitable organisations regardless of HOSS.
Which is that capacity of humanitarian organisations to recieve contributions and technology 'improvements' is limited and requires an approach which ensures the Humanitarian organisation that will continue to host or use the technology tools are fully empowered to do so and will not be left holding as technology tool they are not fully able to understand and maintain. This then becomes about the interconnected sustainability of improving HOSS tools through design volunteer contributions and ensuring those move at a pace that matches the maintainers or host humaniatran organisation.
