# Notes on books for designers

Leaning more towards practice based books.


## Notes on reading 'Extra Bold' a feminist inclusive anti-racist non binary field guide for graphic designers.

There are two prominent sections to note in this book and one 'over-arching' message to convey from this book.

The first mention of an OSS technology is in Amy Lee Walton's interview text. There is a question 'At Mapbox, how could you use design and technology for social good?' the first sentence of the response mentions Mapbox believing in OSS (given that not all of Mapbox's tools are OSS and a good deal of them are paid for service). There is then an ongoing sentiment around tools that can be used for good should be freely available (within financial reason for profit making companies) and that fewer people can access proprietary tools than open. They then go on to reference a colonial aspect of technology where only those the the 'west' (developed countries, first world, global north) have had less restricted access to tools that can be used for critical advocacy (e.g. humanitarian and human rights uses). The arguement here being that maps and map data (and what can be done with them) are powerful tools that can speak truth to power and enable citizen organisation. If of course, the tools are able to be used and configured by those with beginner or non-specialsed technical ability (as most OSS requires a level of technical competency that edges out most folks that 'do not code' or 'can not code').
I find it curious that there is an ascertation of openness and it's connection to social good here. All framed by the design aspects of these tools. There is little other reference to openness practices and open source throughout the rest of the book. There is one mention of Anatasia Collin's emotional labour invoice work that was licensed under creative commons attribution-noncommercial sharealike 4.0. Making this one of the only pieces of work clearly marked as an open source project but only to those that see creative commons licensinga nd think 'open source', which could be few self-identifying designers and more of those that are 'in the know' about OSS licensing.

For a book the instills the topic of design being a tool for social change (sometimes over used in the case of protest poseters of recent times e.g. black lives matters posters) there is a shocking lack of the legal aspects of copyright and sharing protocols as well as a distinct lack of information where OSS could be a socially motivated alternative - there's a section on gig economy websites like fivver, a section on building portfolios and also the complex nature of credit and ownership in the era of the open web. These section has a distinct lack of insight on the alternatives to the common models that speak volumes given it's absence - that open source and open design practices are far from front of mind in those that are speaking prominently in our consumable media and remains an obscure aspect of technology to be mentioned offhand as a social impact motivator aka corporate-speak open-source washing. 