# Talking-with-humanitarian-tech-group-about-OSS

### Introduction

On November the 4th 2021 I spoke with one of the two paid members of staf at [techfugees](https://techfugees.com/) they had reached out after seeing on of my talks that circulated in 2019-2020 around the project [Open Design - Eriol's forked repository](https://github.com/Erioldoesdesign/opendesign) (Archived repo from Ushahidi with issues [Open Design on Ushahidi](https://github.com/ushahidi/opendesign)). The specific talk was this one from [FOSS4G in 2019](https://youtu.be/KYOYSACLgdc) which is a conference specifically for geo/map based OSS projects to present and gather at. This talk was given before the active workshops in Taiwan and India that developed and tested the methodologies of the Open Design project and reported back on them to the funder, [Adobe Fund for Design](https://www.adobe.com/products/xd/adobe-fund.html).

Techfugees wanted to ask 3 things of me, the first was for me to take a look at their recently re-developed principles for the organisation and the subseuqent local chapters (these local chapters are based around the world often closer in proximity to informal settlements and refugee camps) [The principles can be found here](https://www.notion.so/covidrefugees/Techfugees-Guiding-Principles-b869ab9cd6754c78bcd6e5391f020e4a) and specifcally the one related to [Open Source](https://www.notion.so/4-Sharing-is-caring-Opensource-e55de14465f5467bbc893b93e703dbdd). They also wanted to talk generally about short and long term committment on how to involve designers in the technology volunteering process around OSS contribution and they wanted to talk about how they, as an organisation looked to by vunerable people, curate and manage a list of OSS tools and software that are not 'owned' or 'maintained' by Techfugees but are submitted and platformed by Techfugees for refugees and how they can be certain of the sustainability and long term support of a particular OSS without a large maintenance task themselves.

We spoke about a number of these challenges across 3 key insights.


### Key Insights

1. The challenge with OSS in times of crisis, when technologists want to do something good in response to a crisis.

This is a replicatable and clear problem in the crisis and incident space in regards to technologists 'spinning up' Open Source Software (and other) projects that are 'helping' that particular crisis. This can clearly be seen when you observe what happened as COVID-19 became an increasingly global crisis where hackathons, project (both OSS and non OSS) became a regular occurence in the technology events communications (listed below). However, these technology events and projects rarely involved the people that the tools were intended to help in either a direct or inderct way. This was the same for functions outside of 'coding', a pattern in OSS outside of crisis but exacerbated by crisis where designers, researchers, product/community managers and documentarians are excluded often not explicitly, but implicitly by the culture and nature of OSS. We can observe a similar pattern emerge in the technology around the recent Afgan crisis with the UNDP's [Hack4Integrity](https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=620497885038970) where as technologists are onboarded into a sphere of humanitarian and human rights as a avenue for thier skills growth and to feel as if they are contributing to crisis and problems globally the structures in place currently lack a view towards inclusion, contextual relevancy to the issue and sustainability of the OSS.

This was a criticism, which was directed at Techfugees by the UNHCR when they first started their work. Captured here in notes during an [interview with the UNHCR's innovation office](https://github.com/ushahidi/opendesign/issues/95) there were valid criticisms like that above, where Techfugues were mostly a group of non-refugees with little to no refugee field workers or organisational experts that 'made tech that wasn't needed' and that organisations like the UNHCR would gladly support initiatives that took into account the broad and complex challege of 'solving refugee problems'. Techfugees seems to be reconciling this history and moving forward along the same lines as the UNHCR who in the original interview were understandbly hesistent to engage with technologists efforts outside of the UN due in large part to the three identified missing components, inclusion, contextual relevancy and sustainability of the OSS.

As written in the Code vs COVID-19 article often the praised result is participation numbers and not the sustainability and relevancy of the tools, software and technology created as opposed to what I've stated above in terms of contexual relevancy, sustainability and inclusion this means that often these hackathons and events push short-term engagement (which the OSS worl is no stranger too) but in a sector (humanitarian and human rights) that cannot be approached in this way as the real world harms for when OSS fails vulnerable people are presented each time there is notable on-mass technologists flocking to a humanitarian or human rights challenge.

* [Code vs COVID-19](https://www.codevscovid19.org/) and subsequent [article speaking about it's success[(https://www.thelocal.ch/20200407/swiss-hackathon-seeks-new-paths-in-battling-coronavirus/)
* [Help with COVID](https://www.helpwithcovid.com/)
* [Corona Virus innovation map article: Map is currently offline](https://www.startupblink.com/blog/coronavirus-innovation-map/)
* [Designers in need of work during COVID-19 google spreadsheet managed by ADP list: active as of Nov 21](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1g1kDk2Mm4eU1uLWEmsBGVR89yi1J83UBcJea6rbmHvA/edit#gid=0)
* [Hague Hacks Corono Virus: fold at home](https://thehaguepeace.org/haguehacks/2021/11/03/beat-corona-by-folding-at-home/)
* [Tech for Good UK's volunteering triaging managed by manchester chapter]()
* [Hack 4 Integrity: UNDP](https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=620497885038970) and the [article/press release since removed from their live site](https://web.archive.org/web/20210128161633/https://www.af.undp.org/content/afghanistan/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2019/Hack4Integrity.html)
* [Search results for Devpost's COVID hackathons globally](https://devpost.com/hackathons?order_by=deadline&search=covid)


2. The challenge with how to help technologists interested in humanitarian technology to have better contextual background knowledge.

Many of the technologists interested in participating in humanitarian and human rights events and OSS projects have good intentions but good intentions are 'fine words but butter no parsnips' meaning that while intentions may be good the overall involvement in these projects could be harmful rather than helpful. As evidences by the conversation with Techfugees they are now struggling with refugee requests for help that could be supported by appropriate technology and there may be an OSS tool that has solved' a particular problem but the Techfugees team are unsure whether to ever recommend an OSS tool for a refugee problem as they have no guarentee that that project will exist in any amount of time in the future or be supported in the way the refugee needs. Techfugees are now challenged with implementing a system of verification for the OSS projects that are submitted to their database in order to 'do right by' their most important stakeholder, the refugees. The labour then involved in maintaining this database of OSS is no trival task and has become cumbersome to maintain. 

An OSS project i was personally involved in over 2020 was the [mutual aid world OSS app](https://coronadonor.wordpress.com/) that aimed to help a mutual aid process when the pandemic lockdowns were at their most intense and people were struggling to get food and nesscities to their homes during lock down. This OSS app was created to facilitate the mutual aid experience between chaarities and people and also between people. The project began to slow down in autumn of 2020 when many of the global lockdowns were easing and as the vaccine was more readily available.

Connected to this issue is a trickier problem of the governance and sustainability of OSS and how that is a little invested skill and topic within the OSS communities themselves. Hard to facilitate and often non-ending discussions often the humanitarian or human rights crisis becomes the diversion topic that avoids the governanace and sustainability conversation which, in a tragic circle contributes to the lack of validity and trustworthyness of the OSS to be recommended by the trusted organisations and services to the refugees.

There are often OSS tools that explicitly include or are solely comprised of the affected community however, these are fewer in prevalence and we dicussed the need for both refugees and non-refugees to collaborate in order for sustainable and well-supported projects to flourish. This also ties into a global-integration need for this particular humanitarian and human rights topic.

Designers and researchers, especially human centred designers, by their function are able to work on contexual relevancy when welcomed into OSS projects and this can be evidenced across multiple OSS projects. However, the involvement of designers and researchers poses new problems around pace/speed and OSS and the challenge of a job function not historically included in OSS. When designers and researchers are involved the pressure from a technologist perspective of 'move quickly' compounded by the nature of 'crisis' means that designers rarely get the time and opportunity to truly make a contextually relevant impact via the design of an OSS tool and design and research is relgated to 'future improvements'.

A related but complicated personal challenge wrapped up in this topic is the challenge around concious or unconcious 'virtue signalling' of technologists. How can we begin to understand to what extent the value of the technology contributors is and how to direct resources in a sustainable way?


3. The challenge with how to help designers with access to methods for that contextual knowledge and the barriers into OSS as a designer.

To expand on the above, there are manay challenges for designers and researchers who become involved in OSS projects and some unique ones for humanitarian and human rights OSS projects. The common OSS problems are cultural, tools based, process based and time for design and research to be considerate and involve the key users/humans that are the audience of the OSS. The particulars with humanitarian and human rights OSS projects are additional cultural challenges and time challanges. For cultural, you now have humanitarian and human rights cultures as well as OSS culture to learn and manage, where in the most complicated of circumstances, all parties do not fully understand each others cultures and needs. With time, as said above, there is an additional pressure on time for delivery given that 'its a crisis'. Many humanitarian and human rights organisations have procedures and policies in place inorder to maintain time efficiency and OSS development can be informed by the 'silicon valley tech' draw for moving fast and breaking things, both of which don't work well together given that humanitarian and human rights organisations have invested huge amounts of time and resources in not breaking things for their most vunerable beneficiaries.

Addtional to these challenges, are many more that face the designers and researchers. I dicussed some of these with Techfugees briefly as many of them are long and complicated conversations that weave into one another, however, we spent time speaking about how designers and researchers background context of 'what is OSS' is largely non-existent or misunderstood and the community of designers and researchers who are informed about OSS are small and over-stretched and therefore unable to affectively mentor the new waves of designers interested in OSS. Additionally to this, designers and reserachers who are informed on both OSS and humanitarian and human rights culture and context are even fewer and even more overstretched.


Techfugees are interested now in what longer term enagagement in OSS looks liek from the volunteers, organisational team, global chapters and the refugee stakeholders themselves and are interested in what participating in this PhD research, focusing on designers involvement in OSS can do to draw attention to these challenges.
