# Talking-with-humanitarian-tech-group-about-OSS

### Introduction

On November the 4th 2021, I spoke with one of the two paid members of staff at [Techfugees](https://techfugees.com/). They had reached out after seeing a talk that circulated in 2019-2020 around the project [Open Design - Eriol's forked repository](https://github.com/Erioldoesdesign/opendesign) (Archived repo from Ushahidi with issues [Open Design on Ushahidi](https://github.com/ushahidi/opendesign)).  The talk was from [FOSS4G in 2019](https://youtu.be/KYOYSACLgdc) which is a conference  for geo/map based OSS projects to present and gather at. This talk was before Open Design workshops in Taiwan and India where the methodology was developed and tested. The funder for Open Design was the [Adobe Fund for Design](https://www.adobe.com/products/xd/adobe-fund.html).

Techfugees wanted to cover three topics. The first was to review their recently re-developed organisational principles that also apply to the local chapters. These local chapters are based around the world often closer in proximity to informal settlements and refugee camps. [The principles can be found here](https://www.notion.so/covidrefugees/Techfugees-Guiding-Principles-b869ab9cd6754c78bcd6e5391f020e4a) and specifically the one related to [Open Source](https://www.notion.so/4-Sharing-is-caring-Opensource-e55de14465f5467bbc893b93e703dbdd). The second was a general discussion about short and long term commitment regarding involving designers in the technology volunteering process around OSS contribution. Particularly how they, as an organisation, looked to by vulnerable people, curate and manage a list of OSS tools and software that are not 'owned' or 'maintained' by Techfugees, but are submitted and 'platformed' by Techfugees. Techfugees are concerned about how they can be more certain of the sustainability and long term support of an OSS project without taking on a large maintenance task themselves.

We spoke about a number of these challenges across 3 key insights.


### Key Insights

1. The challenge with OSS in times of crisis. Where technologists want to do 'something good' with their skills, in response to a crisis.

This is a replicable and clear problem in the crisis and incident space in regards to technologists 'spinning up' Open Source Software (and other) projects that are 'helping' that particular crisis. This can be observed recently when COVID-19 became increasingly a global crisis. Hackathons, projects (both OSS and non-OSS) became a regular occurrence in technology events communications (listed below). However, these technology events and projects rarely involved the people that the tools were intended to help in either a direct or indirect way. This was the same for job/role functions outside of ‘coding’. This is a pattern in OSS even outside of the context of crisis but often exacerbated by crisis. Designers, researchers, product managers, community managers and documentarians are excluded, often not explicitly, but implicitly by the ‘coding focussed’ culture of OSS. 
We can observe the replicable pattern emerge in technology communities by looking towards the recent Afghan crisis with the UNDP's [Hack4Integrity](https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=620497885038970). Technologists are often brought into a sphere of humanitarian and human rights as a pathway for skills growth. As well as to feel they are positively contributing to crisis. The dangerous gap being that the structures in place currently lack an inclusive, contextually (crisis) relevant and sustainable way of building and maintaining the OSS along with the community itself being inclusive, contextually relevant and sustainable. This can in the most harmful situations, add to a colonisation of crisis, aid relief and technology where communities are designed ‘for’ not ‘by’ and ‘with’.

This criticism, was directed at Techfugees by the UNHCR when they first started their work. Captured here in notes during an [interview with the UNHCR's innovation office](https://github.com/ushahidi/opendesign/issues/95). Included in that interview were valid criticisms, like that above, that Techfugees were a group of non-refugees with little to no field workers or organisational experts that 'made tech that wasn't needed’. The UNHCR noted further, that they want to specifically support initiatives that took into careful account, the broad and complex challenges facing refugees and were skeptical of organisations that are ‘well intentioned’ but unable to see the complexities of humanitarian and human rights world. Techfugees appears to be reconciling this history and moving forward along the same lines as the UNHCR, who in the original interview were understandably hesitant to engage with technologists efforts outside of the UN due in large part to the three identified missing components, inclusion, contextual relevancy and sustainability of the OSS.


Observing the technologist events and communities that emerge wen a crisis gains notable publicity, we can see written in the Code vs COVID-19 article often praised participation numbers as a key result of success and avoids mention of sustainability and relevancy of the tools, software and technology created. Better suggestions for results measurement, in alignment with the needs of established humanitarian and human rights organisations would be contextual relevancy, sustainability and inclusion. By focussing on attendance only means that these hackathons and events push short-term engagement, which is familiar in OSS. However, in the humanitarian and human rights sector a short-term approach raises concerns for very real harms for the intended users of said OSS tool outcomes of hackathons. 

* [Code vs COVID-19](https://www.codevscovid19.org/) and subsequent [article speaking about it's success](https://www.thelocal.ch/20200407/swiss-hackathon-seeks-new-paths-in-battling-coronavirus/)
* [Help with COVID](https://www.helpwithcovid.com/)
* [Corona Virus innovation map article: Map is currently offline](https://www.startupblink.com/blog/coronavirus-innovation-map/)
* [Designers in need of work during COVID-19 google spreadsheet managed by ADP list: active as of Nov 21](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1g1kDk2Mm4eU1uLWEmsBGVR89yi1J83UBcJea6rbmHvA/edit#gid=0)
* [Hague Hacks Corono Virus: fold at home](https://thehaguepeace.org/haguehacks/2021/11/03/beat-corona-by-folding-at-home/)
* [Tech for Good UK's volunteering triaging managed by manchester chapter]()
* [Hack 4 Integrity: UNDP](https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=620497885038970) and the [article/press release since removed from their live site](https://web.archive.org/web/20210128161633/https://www.af.undp.org/content/afghanistan/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2019/Hack4Integrity.html)
* [Search results for Devpost's COVID hackathons globally](https://devpost.com/hackathons?order_by=deadline&search=covid)


2. The challenge with how to help technologists interested in humanitarian technology to have better contextual background knowledge.

Many of the technologists interested in participating in humanitarian and human rights events have good intentions but good intentions don’t equal valuable, useful outcomes and could be harm rather than help the crisis affected population of users. 
From the conversation with Techfugees, they expressed that they are struggling with refugee requests for help. These existing, hackathon created OSS technologies that have attempted to solve a particular problem are now met with unease and skepticism by Techfugees team. Who are now unsure whether to ever recommend an OSS tool for a refugee problem as the guarantee that that project will exist in the future, or be supported in the way the refugee needs is unclear. Techfugees are now tasked with implementing a system of verification for the OSS projects that are submitted to their database in order to 'do right by' their most important stakeholder, the refugees. The labour involved in maintaining this database of OSS is no trivial task and has become cumbersome to maintain. The alternatives being not recommending any tools when refugees request them or requesting uncertain, risky tools.

An OSS project I was personally involved in over 2020 was the [mutual aid world OSS app](https://coronadonor.wordpress.com/) They aimed to help a mutual aid process when the pandemic lockdowns were at their most intense and people were struggling to get food and necessities to their homes. This OSS app was created to facilitate the mutual aid experience between charities and people and also between people. The project began to slow down in autumn of 2020 when many of the global lockdowns were easing and as the vaccine was more readily available. Here I saw first hand how an OSS tool can be overwhelmingly popular during a crisis (around 40 active contributors including designers and users) to within 6 month only 2-5 active contributors struggling to keep the project ‘alive’.

Connected to this problem is the difficultly that governance and sustainability of OSS poses to predominantly	volunteer run projects. Governance and community building is an under invested skill and topic within OSS communities. Hard to facilitate and often circular discussions by its nature the humanitarian or human rights aspect of crisis can become a diversion.  Which, in a tragic circle, contributes to the lack of validity and trustworthiness of the OSS in so that it could be recommended by the trusted organisations (Techfugees, UNHCR etc.) to be of service to the affected population.

There are OSS tools that explicitly include or are solely comprised of the affected community however, these are fewer in prevalence and myself and Techfugees discussed the need for both refugees and non-refugees to collaborate in order for sustainable and well-supported projects to flourish. This also ties into a global-integration need for this particular humanitarian and human rights topic.

Designers and researchers, especially human centred designers, by virtues of their function, are able to work within a contextual relevancy when welcomed into OSS projects and this can be evidenced across multiple OSS projects. However, the involvement of designers and researchers poses new problems around pace and speed of OSS and the challenge of a job function (design of all kinds) not being historically included in OSS. When designers and researchers are involved in OSS, the pressure from a technologist perspective of 'move quickly' compounded by the nature of 'crisis' means that designers rarely get the time and opportunity to truly make a contextually relevant impact via the design of an OSS tool and design and research is relegated to 'future improvements’. Furthermore, they do not get time nor resources in order to explore ways that designer can be led by the affected populations and therefore, maintain this colonial approach to design that needs subversion in order to be truly contextual relevant and owned by affected communities.

A connected, complicated challenge in this topic is the of the conscious or unconscious 'virtue signalling' that technologists can do. Here we may speculate that technologists that are involved because of a sense of ‘virtue’ can make it difficult to understand how valuable the technology contribution is, how sustainable is the contribution and if not longer-term sustainable how can we direct shorter-term resources in a sustainable way?


3. The challenge with how to help designers with access to methods for that contextual knowledge and the barriers into OSS as a designer.

To expand on the above, there are many challenges for designers and researchers who become involved in OSS projects and some unique ones for humanitarian and human rights OSS projects. The common OSS problems are cultural, tools based, process based and time for design and research to be considerate and involve the key users/humans that are the audience of the OSS. The specifics with humanitarian and human rights OSS projects are additional cultural challenges and time challenges. For cultural, designers now have humanitarian and human rights cultures as well as OSS culture to learn and manage, where in the most complicated of circumstances, all parties do not fully understand each others cultures and needs. With time, as said above, there is an additional pressure on time for delivery given that ‘it's a crisis'. Many humanitarian and human rights organisations have procedures and policies in place in order to maintain time efficiency and OSS development is likely to be more informed by the 'silicon valley tech' method of ‘moving fast and breaking things’. These don’t tend to work well together, given that humanitarian and human rights organisations have invested huge amounts of time and resources in not breaking things for their most vulnerable beneficiaries.

Additional to these challenges, are many more that face the designers and researchers. I discussed some of these with Techfugees briefly, as many of them are long and complicated conversations that weave into one another. We spent time speaking about how designers and researchers background context of 'what is OSS' is largely non-existent or misunderstood and the community of designers and researchers who are informed about OSS are small and over-stretched and therefore unable to affectively mentor the new waves of designers interested in OSS. Designers and researchers who are informed on both OSS and humanitarian and human rights culture and context are even fewer and even more overstretched.

Techfugees are interested now in what longer term engagement in OSS looks like from the volunteers, organisational team, global chapters and the refugee stakeholders themselves and are interested in what participating in this PhD research, focusing on designers involvement in OSS can do to draw attention to these challenges.

